the un's top court has rejected a
request by Nicaragua to order Germany to
stop sending weapons and other military
aid to Israel the international court of
justice in the ha ruled that legal
conditions for making that kind of order
simply have not been met Nicaragua
argues that by supplying weapons to
Israel Germany is facilitating genocide
in Gaza during the hearings the German
government said that it had barely
exported weapons to Israel since the
offensive started following the October
7th Terror attacks by
Hamas all right for some legal analysis
now I'm joined by Sir Jeffrey nice he
worked at the international criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
between 1998 and 2006 and he led the
prosecution of sanan mosovich the former
president of Serbia Mr Nice it's good to
have you with us again um am I reading
this correctly that the the court today
said that it looked at the facts and
based on the facts at this time it
cannot give
um Nicaragua what it
wanted completely correct it's a sort of
in a way it's a sort of holding
judgment it certainly
doesn't achieve for Nicaragua what it
wanted to achieve but it does little
else in way of favoring one side or
other of this horrible conflict it did
Identify two things first that Nicaragua
can press ahead with its
case um against
Israel against Germany if it wishes to
on the basis that Germany may have uh
become involved in the supply of arms
for uh use in what is an unlawful what
may be an unlawful con conduct of
conflict but not at this stage
sufficient evidence to prove a need for
protective measures and it also left
uh without comment the vulnerability of
States generally to IC and
icj international court of justice
jurisdiction
for for example provision of arms to
Israel for its conduct of the war yeah
so it was a bit of a holy judgment yeah
I want to pick up on that in just a
moment but I just want to be clear this
case um continues and does does that
mean that the court could eventually
rule against Germany at a later
stage Nicaragua's case against Germany
which alleges breaches of the genocide
convention by Germany in respect of its
provision of weapons can
continue whether that will actually
happen I think is
a matter for future consideration but it
can continue because Germany tried to
have it taken off the list of the
Court's cases and the court
refused what what's your read on this Mr
Nice do you think that um this is
basically you know the end of this
case I don't know whether it's the end
of this case um and I'm not sure that I
have an overall view
but it
leaves states that are
supplying weapons to Israel
uh in the position that they know they
may be pursued at the international
court of justice by any other state
that's a party the genocide convention
if that other state is able to establish
that
the subject state
is in the possession of knowledge
knowing it knows that its weapons may be
used for unlawful conduct of
War so um that's one part of the redard
the other part I think is that and this
is quite a helpful thing from Germany's
point of view but also from the point of
view of other
countries it's really saying don't jump
too soon could be said of Nicaragua as I
believe it's been said in respect of
alleged uh Reflection by Nicaragua of
Russian interest that it's jumped too
soon it's tried with insufficient
evidence but almost on emotional grounds
to bring this case against Germany and
what we all have to do is to detach
ourselves from the high emotions that
can be generated by this awful conflict
and just look at the evidence and I
think that perhaps the most valuable
element of this judgment overall and on
for both sides is to set aside the
emotion look at the evidence is there
unlawful conflict if there is unlawful
conflict who's to who's to bear respons
responsibility is it didn't the court
isn't the court doing exactly that the
the court today in its ruling said that
it noted that Germany had reduced
significantly the amount and value of
weapons that it has sent to Israel since
the October Hamas Terror attacks I mean
as proof that Germany is not trying to
arm a country to commit genocide that's
a non-emotional observation
correct well I found the order pretty
thin both when I listened to it and then
when I eventually found it on the
website it
recites the allegations it recites the
history of Germany's provisions of
Weaponry both its various licenses that
are required the weapons provided and
the weapons requested to be granted a
license I think a submarine and some
other aircraft I think for which no
provision no licenses have yet been
granted and to that extent it certainly
seemed to have given a decision based on
Germany's conduct but it doesn't say it
in terms it simply sets out the evidence
that Germany is providing and says in
light of all this no there's not enough
evidence and that's why I go back to the
original position I think this is a
holding position and in a way it's quite
a clever thing for the court to have
done because of because it can't go it
can't reverse the earlier decision made
in January brought as a result of what
South Africa did right so it respects
that but it doesn't change the position
very much but it warns everyone they've
got to honor the Geneva Convention if
they're signed up to the genocide
convention if they're signed up to it
let me let me pick up this um the case
with South Africa I'm just to remind our
viewers South Africa is accusing Israel
of perpetuating genocide in the Gaza
Strip the court has called on Israel to
do everything in its power to prevent
genocide so does that mean that Israel
may be found to have committed genocide
in Gaza I mean is that question still to
be
answered no it doesn't um and it's
understandable that the shorthand in the
in the words of journalists and
commentators is that there was a
plausible case of genocide established
no
what the court found was that there was
a plausible by the way the word
plausible is not defined it's a word
used by the international court of
justice not by other courts there was a
plausible case for finding that the
rights of the gazan people not to suffer
genocide were at risk of potentially
immediate uh imperilment MH so
it was very slightly different but
significantly different from a finding
of
plausible genocide being committed that
has not been found okay and it's very
important for uh listeners and viewers
to understand that and it's the way
these readings Advance slowly I want to
ask you before we run out of time Mr
Nice the US media reporting that the
international criminal court May issue
an arrest warrant for Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu U we just we don't have much
time here I just want to ask do you
think that that will
happen it begins to look as though the
warrant may be issued that's very good
news not because it's particularly
issued against Netanyahu I don't express
an opinion about that but because it
shows that the international court is
not going to be
intimidated in doing its job in respect
of leaders great small supported and not
supported So to that extent it's good
news whether it's going to be issued or
not I don't know but it's beginning to
look as though it's quite likely okay
and that I think is also good news when
measured against what may be said about
the international criminal court that it
has been very slow over the last decade
or so to conduct
investigations to say things about the
state of Israel
okay um it's been very slow and now
perhaps it's realizing that its
reputation is going to be dependent on
buing by on being seen by the public at
large to do its job regardless of who
the alleged offender may be okay sir
Jeffrey nice as always Mr Nice it's good
to have you with us we appreciate your
analysis tonight thank you you're most
welcome
all right let's talk more about what
happened today I'm joined Now by Michael
Becker he's assistant professor of
international human rights law at
Trinity College in Dublin he's a former
legal adviser to a judge at the
international court of justice Mr Becker
it's good to to have you with us you
know the the Court's president today
said that based on the factual
information and the legal arguments that
were presented the court concludes that
the circumstances are not as such as to
require the exercise of its power does
that mean the court agrees with what
Germany was claiming
here well it's it's it's not quite as
cut and dry as that uh for one thing
it's interesting to note this was not a
close call for the court so this was a
15 to1 decision ruling against
Nicaragua's request here um but what's I
think significant is that this was a
decision that turned on the facts so we
have very little legal reasoning in the
Court's decision this really came down
to the court finding that Germany during
its presentation earlier this month had
put forward sufficient factual
information to really undermine and call
into question many of Nicaragua's
allegations and accusations some of
which appeared to be based on incorrect
information and maybe came off a little
bit like exaggerations which I think
didn't play very well in front of the
court and bearing that in mind this case
however is is not over correct
absolutely this was only about seeking
what we call provisional measures so
kind of interim relief while the case is
pending and Nicaragua was asking the
court to order Germany among other
things to immediately cease all weapons
shipments arms shipments to Israel
what's quite important here and this was
in your leadin part of Germany's uh
defense was to say well actually uh
since at least late October we have not
been sending any significant amount of
war weapons to Israel so Germany having
made that repres representation to the
court um I think it it actually does uh
put a constraint on Germany in terms of
uh changing course and resuming that but
you're absolutely right this was only
about provisional measures the court
continues Germany will have now a chance
to challenge the Court's Jurisdiction
and admissibility which they surely will
do and if it goes ahead Nicaragua will
have the opportunity to put forward a
much Fuller record that challenges some
of Germany's assertions at this stage
about the robust framework that Germany
has in place to provide oversight over
its weapon sales so that that means
Germany could still be found to have
facilitated genocide in Gaza
correct that's correct and it's not only
about uh facilitating genocide or
failing to prevent genocide which is
probably the slightly lower bar to clear
this is important this isn't only a case
like the South Africa Israel case this
isn't only about the genocide convention
Nicaragua also claims that uh Germany is
uh in violation of international
humanitarian law by doing things or
failing to do certain things to ensure
respect for international humanitarian
law by Israel so by the idea is that by
sending weapons to Israel You're
facilitating uh violations of
international humanitarian law that's an
issue that will remain in the case and
it will now be for Nicaragua to try to
show which they weren't able to do at
this initial stage try to show
that all of Germany's representations
about how
Germany exercises a high degree of due
diligence to prevent weapons shipments
from being used to violate international
law Nicaragua now has the burden of
trying to show that actually as applied
or as implemented um that that regul
that regulatory framework isn't enough
let me pick up on that the other case
you mentioned with South Africa South
Africa is accusing Israel of
perpetuating genocide in Gaza the court
has called on Israel to do everything in
its power to prevent genocide so what
does that say to you does it say that
Israel could eventually be found
guilty well that a decision on that
question in the South Africa versus
Israel case is a long ways away we now
have two sets of provisional measures in
that case so unlike the Nicaragua case
where the court rejected that request
the court has twice indicated
provisional measures against Israel and
the last time I think the the rhetoric
the language from the court was uh much
stronger really deeply concerned that uh
one of the judges refers to all the
alarm bells of of genocide going off
here um so I I think we don't know what
the outcome is going to be in that case
it's very difficult to prove genocidal
intent it's very difficult to establish
genocide at the level of the state that
said I think that it's probably the case
that some of Israel's actions even since
South Africa first filed this case at
the end of December has actually made
South Africa's case stronger rather than
weakening South Africa's arguments do
you think the rulings that we have seen
so far do you think they are they are
going to shape the way that genocide
will be defined in the
future that's a great question and I
think that this case provides an
important opportunity for the court to
perhaps revisit the way it's approached
genocide in the past and it's also the
case that um the situation in Gaza
raises aspects of the law of genocide
that haven't really been litigated in
front of an international court before
right now for example there's a lot of
attention on um the situation of
starvation or famine in Gaza and how
that might play into a finding of
genocide so this case will almost truly
develop the law of genocide but whether
it develops the law of genocide in a way
that creates a slightly more liberalized
regime or or um relaxes the very
exacting standard to establish genocide
or not uh that's what we're going to
have to watch out for over not only the
next few months but in fact years before
there's a determination in that case
Okay Michael Becker we appreciate your
time and your analysis today thank
you thank you